140                                                     4  The Stability Threshold


The eigenvalues are ˙i!. The reason a method like Euler’s method can never
perform well for molecular dynamics is that molecular dynamics is a Hamiltonian
system and at the bottoms of basins on the energy surface, which correspond to
stable centers, we expect all the eigenvalues of a local linearization of the problem
to be purely imaginary. The stability condition always fails to hold and, for Euler’s
method, zn grows exponentially rapidly away from the equilibrium point.
   Let us perform a similar analysis for the Symplectic Euler method. Because Sym-
plectic Euler cannot be applied to scalar equations (due to its partitioned structure)
we must work directly with the second order system, but this is straightforward for
the harmonic oscillator. The timestep map is deﬁned by

                   Q D q C hP;

                      P D p  h˝2q:

Solving for Q, P this yields

                Q      1  h2˝2 h   q
                D                                :
                   P       h˝2  1   p

The eigenvalues of the matrix are easily found, they are

                         h2˝2   1 p
                               1;2 D 1     ˙   h4˝4  4h2˝2:
                            2     2

Then we observe that for h2˝2    4, they are complex and their squared magnitude
is

                       h2˝2  2   1
                      j  1;2j2 D  1      C   4h2˝2  h4˝4 D 1;
                           2       4

thus both eigenvalues lie on the unit circle in the complex plane as long as

                      h˝   2:

This is the so-called linear stability condition of the Symplectic Euler method: if
h˝   2 the integrator is stable. When h˝ > 2, the eigenvalues of the discretization
method are both real, with one strictly inside and one strictly outside the unit circle.
This implies that the method will exhibit exponentially growing solutions. We say
that the stability threshold of the Symplectic Euler method is 2=˝.
  Among explicit symplectic Partitioned Runge-Kutta methods this is the max-
imum stability threshold [74]. In a similar way one can analyze the stability of
the Verlet and other methods and one thus obtains conditions on the stepsize that
must hold for the equilibrium points to be stable in the linearization. Analyzing
the stability of both continuous and discrete iteration is much more complicated for