144                                                     4  The Stability Threshold


  When we apply a method such as Implicit Midpoint to a nonlinear molecular
dynamics problem, we may reduce the equations to determining midpoint values Oq,
Op such that

                        h                  h
                               Oq D qn C 2M  1Op;         Op D pn   2rU.Oq/;

where, then,

                        h                    h
               qnC1 D Oq C 2M  1Op;     pnC1 D Op   2rU.Oq/:

We may therefore view the step as a composition of Implicit Euler and Explicit
Euler half-steps. Eliminating Op, we ﬁnd

                           h          h2
                                     Oq D qn C 2M 1pn   4 M 1rU.Oq/:

This is a nonlinear system of equations for Oq. There is no avoiding the substantial
challenge of solving this system. In principle this can be achieved using various
iterative methods, such as the Gauss-Newton method. In case the forces are long-
ranged (e.g. due to Coulombic terms) the cost of a single iteration will include the
cost of a force evaluation, although we must also cope with numerically solving a
system of linear equations for the update. In order to beneﬁt from the symplectic
property of the Implicit Midpoint method, the iteration must be performed to
high accuracy (i.e. several iterations will typically be needed), otherwise one will
observe growing errors in energy and trajectory accuracy. Given the accuracy issue
associated to using large stepsizes due to the corruption of the phase, the possible
gain from using an implicit method is found to be limited and methods like this
are rarely encountered in molecular modelling applications. An exception are the
methods used in handling constrained systems (see Section 4.3, below).



4.2  Multiple Timestepping


The stringency of the timestep threshold and the failure of implicit methods to
address the issue have led to alternative proposals for ameliorating the instability
in molecular dynamics, in particular the method of “multiple timestepping” which
we next describe. Variants of this method were described in a series of papers in
the early 1990s by Tuckerman and Berne [374] and Tuckerman et al. [375, 377].
A simultaneous development by Grubmüller et al. [158] most closely matches the
presentation given here. The ﬁrst resonance analysis is due to Biesiadecki and Skeel
[35].