148                                                     4  The Stability Threshold


for the harmonic one, then we encounter more complicated nonlinear resonances.
It is challenging (perhaps impossible) to analyze the destabilizing effect of such
resonances in a general molecular dynamics setting, but it is possible to do so in
some cases for low-dimensional model problems [247, 329, 339].
   In practice the presence of resonances may or may not render the multiple
timestepping technique ineffective. One would be concerned if the only gain were
from the Verlet stability threshold at  NhVerlet D 2=˝ to the location of the ﬁrst
resonance peak at NhMTS D  =˝, since the multiple timestepping method introduces
additional complexity. However, the picture is complicated by the observation that
the strength of the leading resonance is often modest, so the growth observed
in practice may be slow and, depending on the nature of the coupling of the
variables of the system (which depends on details of the potential energy functions,
natural coupling of the modes of the system, and the presence of solvent molecules
which may introduce a stochastic effect) the growth of error due to resonance
may be masked by other factors of a strongly system-dependent nature. Moreover,
molecular systems are often subject to a stochastic thermostat (a topic to be
addressed in later chapters) which may further alter the role of the resonances.
Thus the study of the effect of linear and nonlinear resonance peaks on the error in
molecular dynamics simulation becomes quickly a numerical issue which must be
investigated using carefully crafted experiments. The analysis of [245] clearly raises
some concerns regarding the use of multiple timestepping in molecular simulation,
in particularly they suggest that the usable gain from RESPA simulations in systems
with detailed solvent (water) is only around a factor of  =2 compared what can be
achieved using a standard integrator such as Verlet (similar what would be suggested
by resonance analysis). Nevertheless there are practical examples where multiple
timestepping is used, especially in schemes incorporating stochastic perturbation
and with relatively strong scale separation, as when multiple timestepping  is
combined with the particle-mesh Ewald summation long-ranged force computation
technique. In Sect. 7.13 we discuss the use of multiple timestepping in connection
with Langevin dynamics. In Sect. 8.6, we describe the combination of multiple
timestepping with isokinetic constraints and stochastic perturbation, where very
substantial increases in outer timestep are found to be possible.



4.2.2  The Molliﬁed Impulse Method


The onset of instability of multiple timestepping is a consequence of introducing
periodic impulses (via slow force updates) in resonance with a natural frequency of
the system. As a means of avoiding or at least ameliorating the effect of resonances,
it has been proposed to modify the points at which the slow forces in multiple
timestepping are evaluated. The molliﬁed impulse method (MOLLY) [141] is a form
of multiple timestepping in which the potential energy function is modiﬁed based on
an averaging of the position variable (over fast dynamics) in such a way as to ﬁlter
out destabilizing excitations. Effectively, one replaces US.q/ wherever it appears