4.3  Methods for Constrained Dynamics                                           149



                                                                                       def
within the MTS method by a modiﬁed potential function NU.q/ D US.A.q//. The
mapping A.q/ is deﬁned by reference to the fast dynamics, e.g. by the weighted
average

                               1 XK
                      A.q/ D                            i  i.q/;
                      K C 1
                                             iD0

where the     i are deﬁned recursively by solving the system with Hamiltonian

                           Hfast.q; p/ D pTM 1p=2 C UF.q/

starting from initial position q and zero initial momentum p, for K timesteps using a
small stepsize  f. This small step does not have to be directly related to the timestep
used for integrating the fast dynamics within the MTS scheme; it is only used for
the averaging procedure. The resulting sequence of    i clearly are functions of q only
and so A is well deﬁned. The weights    i appearing in the average may be selected
in various ways. The initialization of the calculation of the     i can, moreover, be
modiﬁed by various alternative q-dependent proposals, or may be randomized.
  An alternative, simpler, and probably more robust, procedure is simply to ﬁx the
value of A.q/ by constraining q to its mechanical equilibrium value [189] in which
case no fast averaging whatsoever needs to be performed. This approach relies on
the use of the SHAKE method of constrained molecular dynamics (see the following
section).
   In each of the molliﬁed multiple timestepping methods, since only the potential
energy is modiﬁed, and by a smooth mapping of positions, the forces derived by
differentiating NU are still conservative, and, just as with the MTS method, the
scheme remains symplectic.
  The molliﬁcation is only applied for the purpose of modifying the slow impulse
and the molliﬁed methods are in other ways identical to multiple timestepping.
These schemes appear to confer some distinct advantage in the large stepsize in
molecular dynamics. For example where a detailed and fully ﬂexible molecular
model of a solvated biomolecule might require stepsizes of 2 fs in a Verlet
simulation, molliﬁed impulse methods may allow increases to 6 fs [189] in the
‘large’ timestep, i.e. the period between reevaluations of the slow forces. This
beneﬁt may be substantial in simulations of large systems.



4.3  Methods for Constrained Dynamics


Constraints are used frequently in molecular modelling. By a constraint, we mean
a modiﬁcation of a dynamical system to maintain the constancy of a given function
of coordinates (or coordinates and momenta). In this section we consider holonomic
constraints which may be expressed in terms of positions only, and perhaps time,