164                                                     4  The Stability Threshold


  The constrained ﬂow on the kinetic energy term, on the other hand, is generated
by the equations of motion

                           dq
                  D M 1p;
                                  dt
                           dp
                  D  g0.q/T   ;
                                  dt

                            0 D g.q/:

This is nothing other than the mass-weighted geodesic ﬂow on the given constraint
surface. In most cases, the complication of solving the geodesic ﬂow would lead
to a need for additional approximations, however it is worth noting that in many
applications, by far the most important cost is the calculation of the force  rU,
hence a further approximation of the geodesic ﬂow could be justiﬁed if this method
conferred additional stability or other beneﬁts. We do not consider this further
here, but take up the construction as part of our treatment of constrained stochastic
dynamics in Section 7.12.
   For an alternative approach to the construction of higher-order composition
methods for constrained systems see [309].



4.3.6  Algorithms for Molecular Simulation Using Constraints


Because of their importance in the molecular simulation process, a wide variety of
methods for handling holonomic constraints have been proposed in the past few
decades. We summarize a few of these here.
  The term “SHAKE” normally refers to both the discretization mentioned above
and the component-wise solution of the nonlinear equations (these methods were
suggested together in the paper [322]). Using the traditional SHAKE approach we
solve the Eqs. (4.27)–(4.29) using the iterative procedure of Sect. 4.3.3. If RATTLE
is used for discretization, the iterative method of Sect. 4.3.3 can again be used to
solve (4.30)–(4.32), followed by a subsequent solve of Eqs. (4.33)–(4.34).
  While SHAKE/RATTLE is a robust procedure the sequential, iterative character
of nonlinear solvers needed for its implementation can lead inefﬁciencies when it is
implemented on a parallel computer. Therefore, a number of the alternative methods
avoid iteration. We brieﬂy summarize a few of the popular alternative schemes here.

M-Shake   This  is Newton-iteration-based implementation of SHAKE, using
   (4.18)–(4.19) to solve Eqs. (4.27)–(4.29). Methods like this were ﬁrst proposed
  by Ciccotti and Ryckaert [84] in the context of rigid body molecular dynamics.
  An extended discussion of such methods with reference to their convergence,
   implementation, in particular linear system solvers, and variants such as SHAKE-
  SOR (which uses the “successive over-relaxation” method) can be found in [25].
  A conjugate gradient method can also be used [392].