4.3  Algorithms for Molecular Simulation Using Constraints                          165


SETTLE  The SETTLE method [274] is just the SHAKE approach applied to
   a small system combined with an exact solve of the nonlinear equations. It is
   usually applied to treat rigid bodies (as discussed in the following section).
LINCS   In solving the Eqs. (4.27)–(4.29) by Newton iteration, the largest cost and
   the most signiﬁcant barrier to parallelization is the linear solve. The LINCS
  method [119, 175] uses a series expansion to approximate the inverse matrix
   (which is valid only under certain conditions). The method gives substantial
   speedups in large, weakly-coupled systems.

    It is also possible to use internal coordinate representations to treat constraints,
i.e. parameterization schemes, which are typically based on partitioning the coor-
dinates of the system into a set of independent variables and a complementary
collection of dependent variables (which are expressed in terms of the ﬁrst set).
These approaches result in systems of slightly smaller dimension, but typically
greater complexity. Moreover, the parameterization is typically local which leads to
additional implementation issues. For some details on such schemes and discussion
of their use in molecular simulation, the reader is referred to [20, 190, 255].



4.3.7  Numerical Experiment with SHAKE


We demonstrate the numerical stability beneﬁt of using constraints in simulation
by considering a periodic box of 116 TIP3P water molecules in a periodic box
with side length 16A (for computational convenience the simulated particle density
is slightly below that of liquid water). We simulate the system using the NAMD
package [302], with the CHARMM22 forceﬁeld [246] parameterizing the potential
energy functions. After an initial equilibration of 1ns, we look at the stability
and conservation of energy in this system, when using either the constrained or
unconstrained version of the model. The deviation in the total energy over a further
1ns simulation is plotted in Fig. 4.5. In the unconstrained version of the model, the
internal angle and the bond lengths of each molecule are free to change, governed
by a restraining force from the corresponding potential energy terms. This model
proves to be unstable for stepsizes chosen at 3 fs and over, while the simulation at
h D 2 fs showed a large variance in the energy error (as well as exhibiting energy
drift in longer simulations). For accurate results, we would expect the stepsize to
be restricted to around h D 1 fs, where there is signiﬁcantly smaller average energy
ﬂuctuation.
  By contrast, when using constraints to keep the angle and bond lengths ﬁxed,
we observe that the energy ﬂuctuations are dramatically reduced and we are able
to use considerably higher stepsizes than in the unconstrained case. Although the
use of constraints slightly increases the required computational workload (relative
to the ﬂexible model), the non-bonded force calculation (especially the Coulombic
component) is typically still the dominant cost in each step of the simulation. As
the SHAKE method does not require extra force evaluations, the ability to increase