166                                                     4  The Stability Threshold



                                            6   Flexible water (Verlet)                          h = 0.5fs
                                                                                         h = 1 fs
                                                                                         h = 2 fs
                                            0                                               h = 3 fs                                                                                                                                                                                          (kcal/mol)                                                 h = 4 fs
                                                       -6                                               h = 5 fs

                                            6   Rigid water (Shake)                                                                                                                                                                       deviation

                                            0                                                                                                                Energy

                                                       -6

                                              0                         0.5                        1.0
                                                        Time (ns)

Fig. 4.5 We simulate a cubic box of TIP3P water (left) with box side length 16A using periodic
boundary conditions. The deviation in the total energy is shown for simulations using different
stepsizes (right), when using either the ﬂexible or rigid (constrained) model. Note that the ﬂexible
model could not be stably simulated at the larger stepsizes


the timestep makes constrained simulation typical more efﬁcient than unconstrained
dynamics. In general, a doubling of the timestep is often possible.
  A concern might be that the change of the model from unconstrained to
constrained could alter the properties of the system in a way that would affect the
overal simulation results. In practice, it is normally found that the other model and
sampling errors present mean that the errors due to using constraints are relatively
minor, particularly if the constraints are limited to bond lengths only, and even less
of a factor if the constraints are limited to the bonds between hydrogen atoms and
heavier atoms in biomolecules.



4.4  Rigid Body Systems


In some cases the effect of introducing constraints may be to rigidify completely
certain molecular groups. Constraints are also used as part of coarse-graining
procedures in which large collections of atoms may have their relative motions
eliminated. In this case it is often useful to replace the rigid groups by ideal rigid
bodies and to model these using rigid body dynamics. There is an extensive research
literature on numerical methods for rigid body molecular dynamics, our discussion
here of this topic is limited to a few schemes that we feel offer a reasonable
combination of efﬁciency and geometric ﬁdelity. For a more complete introduction
to the topic, we recommend [80, 84] and the references therein.
  As an example, in the TIP4P model for water, one of the most popular, the waters
are assumed to be rigid bodies and there are 3 charge sites associated to each: the
locations of the hydrogen nuclei and an additional “ghost” site located in the plane
created by the three nuclei and along the perpendicular bisector of the HOH angle
(Fig. 4.6). The potential energy for the interaction of a pair of such molecules, the