170                                                     4  The Stability Threshold


Where Krot represents the rotational kinetic energy expressed in terms of the body-
ﬁxed angular momentum vectors, Ktrans is the translational kinetic energy, U is the
potential energy which is a function of all the positions and dipole orientations. The
vectors   k can be taken to be unit vectors reﬂecting the dipole orientation, so they
are subject to the constraint k  kk    1. The total dipole-dipole interaction potential
then takes the form

                            'dipij D 'LJ.rij/ C  Ti L.qij/   j;

with U given as the sum of these over pairs. The 3  3 matrix L is given by

                        1   3
                     L.qij/ D          qijqTij;        qij D qi    qj:
                                r3ij    r5ij

The rotational kinetic energy may be written

                                 1 XN    2i;1       2i;2       2i;3
                 Krot.  1;   2; : : : ;  N/ D      C   C       ;
                                 2       I1       I2       I3
                                            iD1

with I1; I2; I3 the moments of inertia, taken to be diagonal with respect to a suitable
coordinate system. Introducing a rotation matrix    k for the kth dipole, we have
  k.t/ D    k  k.0/, where  k.0/ is a reference conﬁguration of the dipole (its initial
state). Then

          XN              T
                                Krot D    Tr   P iR P i     ;
                                    iD1

with R deﬁned in terms of T D diag.I1; I2; I3/ by (4.40).

  We now have two alternatives for representing the rotational motion. In the
ﬁrst, the rotation matrix describing the rigid body’s orientation is the dynamical
quantity (and we need to enforce the orthogonality of this matrix as a constraint).
This leads to a constrained integration method, which makes use of SHAKE (in
a somewhat different way from the method [84] which constrains the relative
positions of particles). In the second formulation, the orthogonality is used to
perform a reduction to an angular velocity (or momentum) representation with
respect to the body frame of reference.
  A Hamiltonian description of the motion may be formulated in either system
of notation. The Hamiltonian formulation with rotation matrices involves variables
qcm; pcm (phase space variables describing the center of mass motion) and     ; ˘ ,
which are 3  3 matrices. The Hamiltonian is (for a single rigid body):

                      kpcmk2   Tr ˘ R 1˘ T
            HRB D    C        C U.qcm;   /;
                2M          2