4.4  Rigid Body Systems                                                       173


i.e. we compose the ﬂows of

        2    3        2    3        2    3
             T1 1  1                 0                   0
       P D   4  0  5 ;     P D   4 T2 1 5 ;     P D   4  0 5 ;
                0                   0                T3 1

Each of these is, it turns out, easily integrated as a planar rotation (see Exercise 7).
This yields a simple, efﬁcient algorithm for the free rigid body which is symplectic
in a generalized sense.



4.4.2  Rigid Body Molecular Dynamics Algorithm


To develop an integrator for the complete system (including external forces), we
invoke the splitting technique,2 solving successively for the translational motion
from the center of mass equations, integrating the torques due to the rotational
interactions, then solving the Euler equations, and recovering the rotation matrix
from the linear system

                                      P D   skew.T  1  /:

This is the approach described in [112] and is implemented in several software
packages.
  The reliability of these methods is supported by the fact that the combined
scheme is a symplectic method in the generalized sense of constrained dynamics.
  The speciﬁc steps of the algorithm proposed in [112] are given here. In what
follows, we denote the variables associated to the kth rigid body by qk (position
of center of mass),     k (3   3 rotation matrix), pk (linear momentum vector),
and   k (angular momentum vector). Individual components are deﬁned by double
subscripts: the 2nd component of   k is  2.k Procedures given below for rigid body k
are meant to be performed for all rigid bodies in the system.
  The algorithm is initialized by computing the forces Fk and torques   k acting on
the kth rigid body, evaluated at the initial point. The relevant expressions are:

                  @U           k                  k T @U               Fk D         ;    D   rot                        :
                         @qk                      @   k





2We note the seminal role of the work in astronomy of Touma and Wisdom [368] in elucidating
the “divide and conquer” approach for deriving such schemes for rigid bodies.