3.5  Energy Conserving Methods                                                123


We see that

               I.unC1; vnC1/ D unC1   vnC1 D un   vn D I.un; vn/;

which means that Euler’s method conserves this ﬁrst integral. We say that this
conservation property is exact, even though, in practice, there could be ﬂuctuations
in the result depending on how the computations are carried out on a computer
(normally, if the relevant algebraic equations are solved numerically, there will be
small residual errors which are similar in magnitude to the computer rounding error.
   Generalizing this slightly, we could imagine a system of ODEs of the form

                                                                            Pz D f.z/;

such that, for some vector b,

                            b  f.z/    0;

then I.z/ D b  z is a ﬁrst integral. It is straightforward to see that Euler’s method
conserves such a linear ﬁrst integral exactly, as is true of many other popular
numerical methods. Thus momentum conservation is rarely violated by (sensible)
numerical methods.
  The interest is usually in conserving some more complicated ﬁrst integrals, for
example the energy of the system. None of the schemes we have considered so far
(Euler’s method, Störmer-Verlet, etc.) conserves this quantity exactly, even in the
case of a harmonic oscillator. In the case of Euler’s method applied to the harmonic
oscillator, the error in energy grows with time and without bound. In the case of
Störmer-Verlet, the energy ﬂuctuates but remains bounded for all time and at its
worst is of size proportional to h2, a numerical observation that is supported by the
existence of the modiﬁed Hamiltonian.
    It is tempting to consider energy-conserving methods by which the energy is
corrected at each step back to the initial value. This is easy to do in general, and
there are in fact many choices of the method used. Let us consider one particular
approach. We start by taking a timestep with any arbitrary (nonconserving) numer-
ical method, say to an intermediate phase point NQ; NP, then we “ﬁx it up” by scaling
the momentum by an adjustment factor, deﬁning

                 Q D NQ;   P D   NP;

selecting   so that the energy in the result is a prescribed value E. The energy
ﬂuctuation in our pre-correction scheme would typically be small in a single
timestep, so the correction   should also be close to one. This method is easy to
implement: the equation that must be solved is

                                  2 NPTM  1 NP
                    C U. NQ/ D E;                      (3.12)
                           2