124                                              3  Analyzing Geometric Integrators

and, since NQ is known, this gives

                          E   NU  1=2
                D                    ;                          (3.13)
                                                 NK

where NU D U. NQ/ and NK D NP TM  1 NP=2 are the potential and kinetic energies after
a step of the original non-conserving scheme. As long as the steps are small enough
we could hope that the resulting method is sensible. This is, however, not quite true.
If, in the harmonic oscillator, NpnC1 happens to vanish, then    is not deﬁned. We
could work around this obstacle by assuming a large number of degrees of freedom,
in which case NK is only zero if all the momenta simultaneously vanish and this
situation is, in a realistic model of a molecule, extremely unlikely. We also must
assume that E  NU    0, which, for a large system, seems the likely situation, since we
may suppose NK C NU D NE   E, thus E   NU    NK    0. Thus we assume a system with
many degrees of freedom so that all the conditions for the method to be well deﬁned
are satisﬁed. Although it may appear that the method requires two evaluations of the
energy at each timestep (which may seem a high cost, since Euler’s method and even
the 2nd order Verlet method only require one), the evaluation of the energy needed
to compute   is at the end point of the combined step, and this is the starting point
for the next step—essentially the same work would be needed anyway to compute
the forces at the next step. In practice, some care must be exercised in implementing
this method. In particular the kinetic energy needs to be monitored for approach to
zero; when this occurs the projections must be disabled or replaced by an alternate
scheme.
  When we adjust the momenta by scaling in order to satisfy the energy constraint,
we are, in effect, projecting the preliminary numerical approximation onto an
energy surface, using one particular type of projection. There are many alternative
projection methods which we could use for this purpose, which might alter both the
positions and momenta. Modifying the positions means that we will somehow need
to solve the equation

                          H.Q; P/ D E;

where Q depends on a parameter or parameters (typically a Lagrange multiplier
that is used to maintain the constraint). These methods are necessarily implicit and
require solving nonlinear equations involving the potential energy U [308]. In an
iterative strategy such as Newton’s method, we will need to compute the potential
energy several times at each timestep. This is a very high price to pay in practice
and is one reason why complicated energy projection methods are not popular.
   Another reason why energy conserving methods are rarely used in molecular
simulation is that they may lead to behavior that is not consistent with the properties
of our original model. If we think of the procedure that we use to deﬁne the step
as deﬁning a map of phase space, the map does not necessarily have qualitative
properties that mimic those of the original system. Note that, as we have mentioned