3.5  Energy Conserving Methods                                                125


earlier in this chapter, it is in general impossible to simultaneously preserve the
energy and the symplectic structure in a numerical method for Hamiltonian systems.
There is nothing that tells us that the map constructed by energy projection may not
exhibit artiﬁcial behavior (uncharacteristic of Hamiltonian systems). These artiﬁcial
dynamical artifacts are particularly prevalent in low-dimensional models and at
large stepsizes, although they may be manifest in any system.
  We examine here the application of energy conserving methods in connection
with the Lennard-Jones example discussed previously. The projection method may
be used with any integrator. With respect to both Euler’s method and the 4th
order Runge-Kutta method, for large stepsizes, nonphysical effects are noticeable.
However, for small enough stepsize,  it is possible to improve the accuracy of
averages obtained using the Runge-Kutta method by incorporating the projection
(Fig. 3.11 shows the radial distribution for h D 0:01 with and without projection.)
The lesson of this example is that one of the most important features of a method
for molecular dynamics is its conservation of energy. However, already at h D 0:02
the results were poor with the projected Runge-Kutta method. Thus the energy
conservation seems only to offer a beneﬁt as a ﬁne-tuning. The addition of energy
projection does not make the Runge-Kutta scheme competitive with Verlet for
molecular simulation.
  As a second example, we consider a simple model of an atom bonded to a pair
of ﬁxed neighbors by (nonlinear) springs, as depicted in Fig. 3.12. The coefﬁcients
k1 and k2 determine the potential energy function U of the system (a function of the
position of the moving body q D .x; y/, which we assume to lie in a plane). The





                                                           reference
                                       RK4 h= 0.01                                                                                                Distribution
                                                          Projected RK4 h= 0.01





                    0.5      1.0      1.5     2        2.5     3        3.5
                                            interatomic distance

Fig. 3.11 The radial distribution computed using the projected Runge-Kutta method (3.12)–(3.13)
with 1M steps of stepsize h D 0:01, in comparison to that obtained using the unprojected RK4
method with the same number of steps. This result demonstrates improving energy conservation
can have an important effect on the accuracy of computed averages