128                                              3  Analyzing Geometric Integrators


1. The symplectic two-form dq ^ dp.
2. The Hamiltonian (i.e., the energy) H.
3. The volume in phase space (as the vector ﬁeld is divergence free).
4. The time-reversal symmetry.

  A natural question is which of these properties should underpin the design of a
numerical method for molecular dynamics? In this section we address this through
illustrative examples.
  The phase volume conservation can be seen as a consequence of the symplectic
property, but  it is a weaker condition. It is possible to construct methods that
preserve volume but which are not symplectic, and we can build methods that
exactly conserve the energy (as we shall show below). Until now we have said little
about the time-reversal symmetry of molecular dynamics.



3.6.1  Time-Reversal Symmetry


The term time-reversal symmetry or time-reversibility  is used in two ways in
connection with molecular dynamics. In this chapter, we use the term to refer to
a property that can be expressed in terms of the individual trajectories of the system.
(A somewhat different reversibility property is related to the evolution of probability
distributions, see Chap.8.)
   Let Pz D f.z/ be a dynamical system. By an involution we mean a linear mapping
z 7! Rz where R2 D I, i.e. R is its own inverse. Given the involution R we deﬁne
the time reversal of the vector ﬁeld f with respect to R by

                                         Qf.z/ D  RTf.Rz/:

When a vector ﬁeld is its own reversal we say that it is a time-reversible vector ﬁeld.
   Let H.q; p/ D pTM 1p=2 C U.q/ be the Hamiltonian for a system of Nc
conﬁguration variables. Deﬁne the 2Nc   2Nc matrix R by

                                           I 0
                     R D              :
                                 0   I

The vector ﬁelds involved are

         M 1p              M 1p                f D                   ;        Qf D  Rf.Rz/ D                     ;
               rU.q/                    rU.q/

which are clearly equal. Therefore the molecular dynamics Hamiltonian system is
time-reversible.
  The time-reversal symmetry may be understood as a property of the vector ﬁeld.
This engenders a symmetry at the level of the trajectories of the system.