130                                              3  Analyzing Geometric Integrators


where we have slightly abused notation by allowing the symbol R to refer to both
the involution matrix and the corresponding mapping z 7! Rz.
  We may seek numerical methods that mimic this property, which we refer
to time-reversible numerical methods. Recall from the previous chapter that a
numerical method Gh was said to be symmetric if it satisﬁed

                       G  h D G h 1 :

It does not automatically follow that a symmetric numerical method is time-
reversible, i.e. satisﬁes a relation inspired by (3.14), namely

                  R ı Gh ı R ı Gh D Id:                        (3.15)

The additional condition needed to ensure (3.15) is the afﬁne invariance property
(or invariance with respect to the speciﬁc afﬁne transformation z 7! Rz).

Deﬁnition 3.1 (Afﬁne Invariance) Let

                                 dz
                   D f.z/                              (3.16)
                                      dt

be a given ordinary differential equation. The transformation Qz D Az, where A is a
non-singular square matrix, results in the modiﬁed differential equation

                              dz
                  D Af.A  1Qz/:                           (3.17)
                                  dt

Let z0; z1; : : : be a sequence of points obtained by application of the numerical
method Gh to (3.16). If the same method, when applied to (3.17) produces the set of
points Az0; Az1; : : :, then we say that the numerical method is invariant with respect
to the transformation Qz D Az. An afﬁne invariant method is one which is invariant
under any such transformation.

    If a differential equation is time-reversible with respect to the involution R, and
we apply a method which is afﬁne invariant and symmetric, then the method will be
time-reversible (3.15).
   All Runge-Kutta methods and Partitioned Runge-Kutta methods are afﬁne invari-
ant, thus, if they are also symmetric, then they preserve time-reversal symmetry.



3.6.3  Comparing Symplectic and Time-Reversible Methods


The symplectic property

                Ft0T JFt0 D J