132                                              3  Analyzing Geometric Integrators

                  ˚ D    1      :

In such a case the iterates of the two maps will also be conjugate and, if they
are numerical methods, they will have similar stability properties and performance
(e.g. the same effective order). It is difﬁcult to separate the relevance of the two
properties in cases where symplectic and reversible maps are conjugate. This is
however rarely the case and certainly does not hold generically for discrete maps in
many dimensions [209]. There is no direct correspondence between reversible and
symplectic maps, however each class of maps admits certain theorems of dynamical
systems which are in many ways analogous (for example, the Kolmogorov-Arnold-
Moser, or KAM, theory for symplectic maps near elliptic ﬁxed points [386] has an
analogue for reversible maps [97]).
  Of particular importance for molecular dynamics are the following properties:
a symplectic map will preserve volume, whereas a time-reversible map need not
do so, and a symplectic integrator will approximately conserve energy due to the
existence of the perturbed Hamiltonian, whereas a time-reversible integrator may
give rise to a drift in energy [166].



3.7  Molecular Dynamics with Hard-Sphere Collisions


We close this chapter with a discussion of molecular dynamics with hard-core
repulsion. This is a system which is not, properly speaking, Hamiltonian, but
which has dynamics that are largely deﬁned by a Hamiltonian system. The added
complication is the nonsmooth character of the motion as impulses are applied at
points of collision. The discussion below is a summary of work in [40, 184].
  We assume, as usual a Hamiltonian H D pTM 1p=2 C U.q/ but we add the
inequality constraint kqi   qjk           i C    j where   i, i D 1; : : : ; N is a core radius.
The condition kqi   qjk D    i C   j, some i; j deﬁnes the constraint surface. When the
particles are not touching, they move along Newtonian paths deﬁned by the standard
equations of motion. At impact, they exchange momentum and energy according to
the rules of elastic collision. Speciﬁcally, at the point of contact, the momentum
vectors of the two spheres are adjusted according to the rule:

                            p :D p C ˛u?

where u? is normal to the constraint surface and ˛ is a parameter chosen to maintain
the conservation of energy. Let Rc denote the action of the collision operator on the
vector of positions and momenta. Then we can write the evolution formally as

        F h:s: .q; p/ D G    r ı Rc ı G    r  1 : : : ı Rc ı G   0