3.7  Molecular Dynamics with Hard-Sphere Collisions                               133

where    1;    2; : : : ;     r  1 are the times between collisions,    0 is the time until
the ﬁrst collision, and     r is the time between the last collision and   . Here Gt is the
ﬂow map of the smooth system (Hamiltonian H). The trajectory is thus piecewise
smooth with continuous conﬁgurational path and momenta exhibiting ﬁnite jump
discontinuities.
   Various numerical methods have been proposed for collisional Hamiltonian
systems [136, 176, 184, 263, 348, 352]. Typically, these schemes rely on the Verlet
method to propagate the system between collisions, with collisions detected either
(i) by checking for overlap at the end of the step, (ii) checking for overlap during
the step, or (iii) approximating the time to collision before the step. Collisions lead
to momentum exchange between particles according the principle outlined above.



3.7.1  Splitting Methods for Hard Sphere Molecular Dynamics


Splitting methods are suggested by considering a formal hard-sphere Hamiltonian

                            Hh:s: D pTM 1p=2 C U.q/ C Uh:s:;

where Uh:s: is assumed to be inﬁnite for overlapping conﬁgurations (some kqi
qjk         i C   j) and zero otherwise. The hard sphere system described by

                               Hfree D pTM 1p=2 C Uh:s:

consists of purely ballistic (straight line) motion punctuated by momentum jumps.
This system is formally integrable, i.e. we may write down its exact solution for
any given initial conditions. (In practice, for large systems solved in parallel, this
computation may be highly nontrivial [108, 336].) One approach is to consider the
splitting H D Hfree C U, evolving Hfree for ﬁxed intervals punctuated by impulses
derived from the smooth potential U. In [40, 184] this algorithm is termed the
“Primitive Splitting Algorithm” and can be described by the three steps:

             h                                     free                 h
    P :D p  2rU .q/ ;    .Q; P/ :D G                                                h   .q; P/ ;   P :D P  2rU .Q/ :

Even with this symmetric form (“kick”, “drift”, “kick”) where “drift” now involves
the solution of the system Hfree, it was shown in [184] that energy accumulates
rapidly. Assuming a ﬁnite number of collisions on a ﬁxed interval, the error behaves
as O.h/. In long simulations the energy error grows without bound.
  To understand why this is the case, we consider a step of the primitive splitting
algorithm applied to a simple system consisting of a ﬁxed body at the origin
and a single body (mass=1) moving under an external potential and in occasional
contact with the ﬁxed body, both bodies having radius 0:5. Let us consider three
possibilities: (i) there is no collision in the timestep, (ii) there is a collision only at