134                                              3  Analyzing Geometric Integrators


the end of the timestep, and (iii) there is a single collision within the timestep. [The
case of additional collisions within the step could be handled as in (iii).] In cases
(i) and (ii) it is clear that the error accumulating in a single step will be third order
in the stepsize, since the Verlet method has local error of order three (since it is a
second order method).
  Now consider case (iii). The contact happens when the particles are separated by
a distance 1, at which point u? D q. We assume the time of contact is  c.

                          NP :D p    h2rU .q/ ;   qc :D q C  c NP;

              u? :D qc;                 OP :D NP C ˛ u?;

           Q :D qc C .h    c/ OP P :D OP    h2 rU .Q/ ;

The coefﬁcient ˛ is chosen so that the kinetic energy is conserved through collision,
thus

                             u?  NP
                       ˛ D  2            :
                             u? u?

  We next calculate the change in energy in a single step by inserting Q and P into
the Hamiltonian and expanding around the point of collision qc, obtaining


                                def
           H D H .Q; P/  H .q; p/
                                   qTc NP           D   .h  2 c/     qTc rU .qc/ C O h2
                                                     qTc qc

Energy is therefore conserved only to ﬁrst order through the collision unless one of
the following conditions holds:

•  there is no collision
•  the collision occurs at the end of a timestep
•  the collision occurs at the middle of the timestep,  c D h=2,
•  the directional derivative of U along the collision vector (u? D qc) vanishes, or
•  the momentum vector is orthogonal to the collision vector at the point of contact.

   In general, because an error of size O.h/ occurs in each collision and there are a
ﬁnite number of collisions in a ﬁxed time interval, the total error is also O.h/, i.e.
ﬁrst order.