3.7  Molecular Dynamics with Hard-Sphere Collisions                               135

3.7.2  Collisional Verlet Algorithm for Hard Spheres


A method was given in [184] based on a modiﬁed collision procedure which greatly
reduces the error growth.
  The idea is to make use of the quadratic

                                                         t2
                     Q.t/ D q C tM 1p  M 1rU .q/                 (3.18)
                                     2

which represents the position vector obtained from a Verlet step of size t. Note that
this deﬁnes quadratic paths for all particles in the system. It is then possible to
calculate the collision times by solving equations

                      kQi.t/   Qj.t/k D    i C   j;      i ¤ j:                 (3.19)

A step can then be taken to the ﬁrst point of subsequent collision, with positions
updated using the quadratic and momenta adjusted according to the Verlet map
combined with Rc. In this way, all steps taken are Verlet steps so the order of
accuracy is two. Effectively, this is a Verlet method with variable timestep chosen
to match collision times. A maximum outer stepsize hmax is incorporated to prevent
too-large steps from being taken (in case collisions are infrequent). We write the
method here in a slightly different form than in [184]: both the stepsize taken and
the coordinates are viewed as variables.

               Collisional Verlet Algorithm (CVA) [Single Step]

   [computes h (the timestep) and .Q; P/ given a starting point .q; p/]

   Calculate  c the time of next collision from the Verlet paths (quadratics) of (3.18)
   using collision conditions (3.19).
   If  c < hmax, then

     h :D  c
     .Q; P/ :D RcG hVerlet .q; p/

   else

     h :D hmax
     .Q; P/ :D G hVerlet .q; p/

  An alternative to Verlet could be used for propagation between collisions, but it
is likely that the collision computations would then become more costly.
    If the Verlet method is used, then it turns out that the insertion of (3.18) into (3.19)
results in a quartic polynomial that must be solved for each particle pair. Care must
be taken in solving these quartics to ensure that roots are not missed. Using hash
tables, neighbor lists and similar methods (like those used to compute non-bonded
forces), the number of computations can be greatly reduced. Importantly, the
calculations needed are all explicit and ﬁnite (no iteration is needed).