136                                              3  Analyzing Geometric Integrators


   Timestepping then proceeds as usual, with the slight modiﬁcation that the time
between steps will vary throughout integration. Numerical results with this method
reported in [184] are very favorable.



3.7.3  Enhancements of the Collisional Verlet Method


A further idea introduced in [184] was to use a force decoupling strategy to reduce
the cost of computations. The idea is to exploit the observation that impulsive forces
(“kicks”) can be supplied without reducing the order of accuracy as long as these
have a vanishing component in the direction of the collision vector u?, that is if
F? D  rU.qc/ u? D 0. This can be achieved in systems of spheres with pair
potentials 'ij only by writing 'ij D ˛ij C ˇij where the derivative of the second term
is chosen to vanish at the point of contact between the spheres, i.e. ˛0ij.   i C  j/ D 0.
If this decomposition is used, then it is possible to build a 2nd order accurate hybrid
method that uses only the ﬁrst part ˛ to deﬁne the quadratic Verlet paths for the
collision detection scheme, whereas ˇ is introduced as a standard “kick” at collision
points.
   In Collisional Verlet, the momenta are adjusted at the collision point to preserve
the kinetic energy (and hence the total energy). It is possible to project to some other
manifold using projection techniques like those mentioned previously, as discussed
in [40]. In particular, one may use the backward error analysis to obtain a modiﬁed
Hamiltonian QHh corresponding to the Verlet method with stepsize h, then to project
during collisions not onto the energy surface, but onto the modiﬁed energy surface,
so that

                                        QHh    const:

(In practice, a low order approximation of QHh is used, such as the truncation to
terms of order four or six in the stepsize.) The resulting method substantially
exhibits higher accuracy than the standard Collisional Verlet method in long
term simulations, including accurate recovery of statistical properties (for example
velocity autocorrelation functions). Additional cost is, however, involved in the
handling of the collisions.
   Other methods for hard sphere molecular dynamics and polymer modelling based
on variational integration strategies, as well as comparative discussion, are provided
in [235].



Exercises


1. Consider the solutions of